Towards a Comparison of Japanese and English Metaphor

Rowan Hall Maudslay

1

Kanako Komiya

2

Masayuki Asahara

3,4

Simone Teufel

11

University of Cambridge

2

Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology

3

National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics

4

The Graduate University for Advanced Studies, SOKENDAI



{rh635,sht25}@cam.ac.uk, kkomiya@go.tuat.ac.jp,



masayu-a@ninjal.ac.jp



Abstract

In this paper, we report on preliminary experiments inwhich we attempt to use large language models to com-pare Japanese and English metaphors.
More speciﬁcally,we investigate how well GPT is able to translate Japanesemetaphors into English.
We ﬁnd that while GPT is able toproduce high quality sentence translations, it is often notsuccessfully able to identify the key metaphorical word ina longer metaphorical phrase.
Nevertheless, we ﬁnd thatusing GPT we are able to easily identify several cases ofJapanese metaphor not present in conventional English.


1 Introduction

Language is littered with complex patterns of metaphor.
For example, in English many metaphors construe debateusing the language of war: just as one can “attack” anopponent in a debate, so too can claims be “defended”,arguments “shot down”, and so on.
Lakoﬀ and Johnson[1] call a pattern of this nature a conceptual metaphor.
Aconceptual metaphor is a systematic mapping that framesan abstract domain (such as argument) in terms of a con-crete domain which relates to real-world experience (suchas war).
The metaphors mentioned above are all instancesof the same conceptual metaphor, argument is war, whichindicates one way that argument is commonly construed bycontemporary English-speaking communities.
According to Lakoﬀ and Johnson, variation in concep-tual metaphor systems between languages could inﬂuencehow people in diﬀerent cultures think.
As an example,they suggest that speakers of a hypothetical language thathas an argument is dancing conceptual metaphor ratherthan argument is war would experience argument diﬀer-ently.
Lakoﬀ and Johnson’s theory, known as conceptualmetaphor theory (CMT), is the dominant theoretical frame-work in metaphor research, and has been applied broadlyto analyse topics ranging from Nigerian ideology
[2] toShakespeare’s playwriting [3, 4].There has yet to be any large-scale empirical compar-ison of the conceptual metaphors in diﬀerent languages.
We do not know how conceptual metaphors vary betweenlanguages, or how multilingual metaphor diﬀerences corre-late with cultural variation.
While there have been attemptsto study cultural variation of conceptual metaphor betweendiﬀerent languages, these are qualitative in nature, and onlyconsider variation in a single conceptual metaphor [5, 6, 7].Japanese is a language with many properties that diﬀerfrom Western languages, and Japanese researchers havehighlighted limitations in Western research which makesoverly broad claims about English metaphors applying uni-versally
[8].
Later this year, in a project funded by theJapanese Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS),we will be attempting to use computational methods toconduct a systematic comparison of English and Japanesemetaphor.
In this paper, we present preliminary compu-tational explorations of the diﬀerences between Japaneseand English metaphor.
More speciﬁcally, we use a large language model (LLM)to translate metaphorical expressions in a Japanese cor pusinto English.
Our intuition is that if a Japanese metaphor-ical expression also occurs in English, then the Englishtranslation of the Japanese expression will be the samewhen it is translated in a literal and a metaphorical context.
For a small number of Japanese metaphorical sentences(200), we manually evaluate the quality of the synthesizedtranslations, and comment on the viability of this approachfor the identiﬁcation of diﬀerences in metaphor betweenEnglish and Japanese.



2 Resources

In this paper, we use the BCCWJ-Metaphor dataset,a resource consisting of metaphor annotations from theBalanced Corpus of Contemporary Written Japanese (BC-CWJ)[9].
The BCCWJ is a comprehensive corpus com-prising 123 million words across diverse genres, includingbooks, magazines, newspapers, white papers, blogs, on-line bulletin boards, textbooks, and legal documents.
Asof January 2025, it remains the only balanced corpus avail-able for the Japanese language.
Metaphor annotations wereadded by Kato et al.
[10, 11] on a subset of the core datafrom the BCCWJ, which includes samples from maga-zines, newspapers, and books, covering a total of 347,094tokens.
Annotations was performed using the MetaphorIdentiﬁcation Procedure (MIP)[12], and metaphor classeswere assigned accordingly.
According to MIP, a metaphoris recognized when there is a shift from the basic mean-ing of a word to a more abstract or ﬁgurative meaning ina particular context.
In addition to metaphor annotationsfor the BCCWJ, annotations have also been collected formetonymy and synecdoche, but we do not use that data inthis paper.


3 Preliminary Experimentation


In this section, we report on initial experimentation inwhich we use GPT-4o
[13](accessed December 2024) totranslate Japanese metaphors into English.
We experimentwith two varieties of the translation task, described below.


3.1 Translating Metaphorical Sentences

As a ﬁrst translation task, we elicit sentence-level trans-lations from GPT.
Each input corresponds to a Japanesesentence containing a metaphorical expression.
We exper-iment with 200 Japanese sentences of this nature, whichare sourced from the BCCWJ-Metaphor dataset.
To preserve information about the location of themetaphorical expression in each translation, we use squarebrackets to demarcate the position of the metaphor in theJapanese sentence.
We use a system prompt to instructGPT to preser ve the square brackets when translating.
Asystem prompt is a text prompt that is given to GPT beforeit receives any input, which describes the task that it needsto perform on each input.
The system prompt that we usedfor this translation task is as follows:System Prompt 1You are a machine translator.
Translate thegiven Japanese sentences into English.
In eachinput sentence, one expression is enclosedin square brackets.
When you translate thesentence, put the corresponding expression inthe English sentence in square brackets also.
Take care to make sure the correct part of thetranslation is in square brackets.
In general, we found that GPT produced high qualityJapanese to English translations, which were much bet-ter than those produced by other software such as DeepL.However, a common issue with GPT was incorrect brack-eting in the translation.
This occurred in 20. 0% of cases(40/200).
In 62.5% of these erroneous cases (25/40), GPTput the wrong phrase in the output sentence in square brack-ets.
An example of one of these cases is shown below, withmetaphorical phrases underlined:(1) a. その上につくられる躯体は、独自のプレウォールパネル工法により、従来の木造軸組工法の 2・5 倍の強度を発揮。b.
The structure built on top demonstrates strengththat is 2.5 times greater than the conventionalwooden frame construction method, thanks tothe unique pre-wall panel construction method.c.
The structure built on top demonstrates strengththat is 2.5 times greater than the conventionalwooden frame construction method, thanks tothe unique pre-wall panel construction method.
Example (1a) contains the original Japanese sentence.
Ex-ample (1b) contains GPT’s predicted translation.
GPThas not correctly aligned the metaphorical phrase from theoriginal with the translation.
Example (1c) contains GPT’stranslation, but with the correct metaphorical phrase man-ually identiﬁed.
In the remaining 37.
5% of erroneous cases (15/40), theEnglish translation split a metaphorical phrase into severaldiscontiguous segments, but GPT only marked one of thesesegments as metaphorical.
For example:(2) a. 日本の中国侵略へのあからさまな策謀の引き金が引かれようとしていた。b.
The blatant trigger of the scheme for Japan’s in-vasion of China was about to be pulled.c.
The blatant trigger of the scheme for Japan’s in-vasion of China was about to be pulled.

In this case, the original Japanese sentence in example (1a)contains a metaphorical phrase which is split in two in thetranslation.
GPT’s prediction in example (1b) identiﬁespart of the phrase, but misses another part shown in (1c).These translations reveal that what is considered to bea metaphor in the BCCWJ-Metaphor corpus is diﬀerentto what is considered to be a metaphor in English re-sources such as the VUAMC [ 14].
The VUAMC is apopular corpus in which individual tokens were labelledfor metaphoricity following MIP.
In the BCCWJ-Metaphorcorpus, unlike in the VUAMC, long multi-words spans arelabelled as metaphorical.
These spans include not onlymetaphorical words, but also other words that are relevantto the metaphorical transformation.
In order to identifythe metaphorical lexical item in a metaphorically-labelledphrase in the BCCWJ-Metaphor corpus, a more sophisti-cated approach is needed.


3.2 Explaining Metaphors via Translation

As a second translation task, we use GPT to auto-matically select the metaphorical word in a metaphori-cal phrase, and to additionally explain the metaphor viatranslation.
For an input metaphorical phrase from theBCCWJ-Metaphor corpus, we request four pieces of infor-mation from GPT:•
The Japanese word in the input that is metaphorical.• The part of speech of the selected word.•
The literal English translation of the selected word.•
The metaphorical English translation of the selectedword in the context of the utterance.
These four pieces of information are obtained by requestingan output in the form of a JSON object.
This is achievedusing the following system prompt:System Prompt 2You are a translator.
You will be given aphrase in Japanese.
This word contains atarget word that is metaphorical.
You willreturn a JSON object with four fields:The first field is called "word", and shouldcontain the target Japanese word in the phrasethat exhibits metaphor.
The second field is called "POS", and shouldidentify the part of speech of the target word(e.g.
verb, noun).The third field is called"metaphorical translation", and shouldcontain a translation of the contextualmeaning of the target word.
The fourth field is called"literaltranslation", and should containa direct translation of the target word, onits own.
It should be as literal as possible,and should capture the imagery of the basicmeaning of the word.
We use this prompt to elicit translations for the same 200examples that were used in section 3.1.
Example outputsare shown in Table 1.We conduct two preliminary evaluations of the qualityof GPT’s predicted outputs.
These evaluations were per-formed by two native speakers of Japanese, who are notspecially trained in metaphor annotation.
First, an authorof this paper went through each of the 200 examples, andidentiﬁed cases which they thought to be reasonable expla-nations of the metaphor from the input.
In this evaluationsetting, we found that 82.0% of GPT’s predictions werereasonable (164/200).
Second, another author of this pa-per went through each of the 200 examples, and producedtheir own explanation of the metaphorical phrase.
Therewas no ﬁxed form for possible explanations; we note thata wide variety of explanations for metaphors are theoret-ically possible, for instance based directly on the MIP, orbased on violations of subcategorisation preferences.
Theauthor then determined whether GPT’s predictions alignedwith their explanations.
In this evaluation setting, we foundthat that 50.5% of GPT’s predictions aligned with the au-thor’s own explanations (101/200).
We emphasise thatthese numbers are indicative rather than deﬁnitive, as therewere a large number of borderline cases.
The diﬀerence between the results in our two evalu-ation settings suggests that while GPT often produces areasonable explanation of a metaphorical phrase, the ex-planation that it produces is not necessarily the explanationthat would be most apparent to a human annotator.
As anexample, consider the metaphorical phrase 名をつける,which means “to name”.
This phrase consists of threewords: the noun 名(meaning “name”), the direct-objectparticle を, and the verb つける(literally meaning “toattach”).
For this input phrase, we expected GPT to statethat the verb was used metaphorically, because an abstract

Input Metaphorical Phrase Selected Word POS Literal Translation Metaphorical Translation1 特徴をつかんつかん verb grasp understand2 職を退い退い verb step back resign3 ボール紙の山山 noun mountain pile4 バランスを壊す壊す verb break disrupt5 人気の風向き風向き noun wind direction trend6 歴史に幕を下ろす幕を下ろす verb lower the curtain come to an end7 徹底的な英語指導徹底的 adj penetrate to the bottom thorough8 市場に参戦参戦 verb participate in battle enter9 金が払底払底 adj bottom scraped out depleted10 人生の荒波にもまれた荒波 noun rough waves challenges11 修業を積み積み verb pile up gain experience12 格差縮小を視野視野 noun ﬁeld of vision consideration13 依存浮き彫り浮き彫り verb relief sculpture highlighted14 麻薬密輸ルートが芋蔓式に手繰られた芋蔓式 adj like a potato vine in a chain reactionTable 1 Examples of GPT’s generated output for metaphorical phrases in the BCCWJ-Metaphor corpusobject such as a name cannot be physically attached tosomething.
Instead, GPT’s explanation stated that a dif-ferent sense of 名 is evoked in the metaphor, namely asense that refers to “reputation” rather than “name”.
Thisis not the metaphor that we expected, but it is nonethelessa reasonable explanation of a metaphor that is present.
The examples in Table 1 are all cases that both annotatorsthought were reasonable.
There were a total of 94 casesof this nature.
For each of these cases, we manually deter-mined whether or not English has an equivalent metaphor.
We found that 38.3% (36/94) of the metaphors success-fully explained by GPT are common to English.
Examplesof these cases are shown in rows 1–6 in Table 1.
For in-stance, the metaphors for 退い(step back → resign; row2), 山(mountain → pile; row 3), and 幕を下ろす(lowerthe curtain → come to an end; row 6) are all used in En-glish.
Some of the Japanese metaphors are not lexicalisedin exactly the same way in English, but nevertheless occurin both languages.
For example, while the phrase “winddirection” is not used verbatim to refer to a “trend” in En-glish (see row 5), the common English expression “the waythe wind is blowing” captures the same idea.
The remaining 61.
7% (58/94) of the successfully-translated Japanese metaphors do not occur in English;examples of these are shown in rows 7–14.
One case isthe adjective 徹底的, which means “thorough”, but lit-erally translates to “penetrate to the bottom” (row 7).
Insome cases, the Japanese metaphors appear to be basedon conceptual metaphors that are not present in English.
For example, in the phrase 市場に参戦(“enter the mar-ket”; row 8), the word 参戦 means “enter” but literallymeans “participate in battle”.
This suggests the presenceof a conceptual metaphor like economic markets arebattlegrounds, which does not exist in English.
In othercases, English has similar conceptual metaphors, but dif-ferent facets of the conceptual metaphors are realised.
Forexample, the use of 荒波(rough waves → challenges; row10) evokes a life is sailing conceptual metaphor.
In En-glish many nautical phrases such as “char ting a course”,“battening down the hatches”, and being “in the doldr ums”can be applied metaphorically to lived experience, basedon the same conceptual metaphor.
However, in Englishrough waves are not usually construed as challenges.
Often, GPT translated metaphors which did not exist inEnglish using alternative English metaphors.
For example,the phrase 浮き彫り literally means “relief sculpture”, buthas the metaphorical meaning of bringing something toattention.
GPT captured this metaphorical meaning usinga word with a similar metaphorical meaning in English:“highlighted” (row 13).
Similarly, the phrase 芋蔓式 liter-ally means “like a potato vine”, but is used metaphoricallyto describe a series of events that happen one after another.
GPT captures this meaning using the English metaphoricalphrase “in a chain reaction” (row 14).


4 Conclusion and Future Work

Our preliminary investigations indicate that LLMs couldbe used to automatically compare English and Japanesemetaphor systems.
In the future, to support quantitativeanalyses, we need to reﬁne our annotation criteria, therebymaking it possible to conduct systematic annotation.
Wealso need to develop improved prompting procedures.



Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the JSPS KAKENHIGrant Number JP22K12145, the collaborative researchproject “Empirical Computational Psycholinguistics Us-ing Annotated Data” of the National Institute for JapaneseLanguage and Linguistics, and the Kayamori Foundationof Informational Science Advancement Research Grantfor “Extracting Conceptual Metaphors Using Natural Lan-guage Processing.”

References


[1] George Lakoﬀ and Mark Johnson. Metaphors We Live By.University of Chicago Press, 1980.
[2] Akin Odebunmi. Ideology and body part metaphorsin nigerian english. Review of Cognitive Linguistics.Published under the auspices of the Spanish CognitiveLinguistics Association, Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 272–299, 2010.
[3] Sandra Pe˜na Cervel. Macbeth revisited: A cognitive anal-ysis. Metaphor and Symbol, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 1–22,2010.
[4] Bruce Lackie. Catch a falling kingdom: A meditation onKing Lear. Metaphor and Symbolic Activity, Vol. 6, No. 4,pp. 259–270, 1991.
[5] Shahrzad Pirzad Mashak, Abdolreza Pazhakh, and Ab-dolmajid Hayati. A comparative study on basic emotionconceptual metaphors in English and Persian literary texts.International Education Studies, Vol. 5, , January 2012.
[6] Erich A. Berendt and Keiko Tanita. The ‘heart’ of things:A conceptual metaphoric analysis of heart and relatedbody parts in Thai, Japanese and English. InterculturalCommunication Studies, Vol. 20, No. 1, 2011.
[7] Xiao Liu and Guodong Zhao. A comparative study ofemotion metaphors between English and Chinese. Theoryand Practice in Language Studies, Vol. 3, , January 2013.
[8] Kazuko Shinohara and Yoshihiro Matsunaka. An analysisof japanese emotion metaphors. Journal of YokohamaLinguistic Circle, Vol. 4, pp. 1–18, 2003.
[9] Kikuo Maekawa, Makoto Yamazaki, Toshinobu Ogiso,Takehiko Maruyama, Hideki Ogura, Wakako Kashino,Hanae Koiso, Masaya Yamaguchi, Makiro Tanaka, andYasuharu Den. Balanced Corpus of Contemporary Writ-ten Japanese. Language Resources and Evaluation, Vol. 48,pp. 345–371, 2014.
[10] Sachi Kato, Rei Kikuchi, and Masayuki Asahara. 『現代日 本 語 書 き 言 葉 均衡 コ ー パ ス』に対 す る MIPに 基 づ く 比 喩 表 現 情 報 の 付 与 (Assigning MIP-based ﬁgurative expression information to the BalancedCorpus of Contemporary Written Japanese). Proceeringsof NLP2022, pp. 1427–1431, 2022.
[11] Sachi Kato, Rei Kikuchi, and Masayuki Asahara. BCCWJ-Metaphor における比喩表現認定と情報付与作業手順 (Procedures for recognizing ﬁgurative expressions andassigning information in BCCWJ-Metaphor). Proceeringsof NLP2025, 2025.
[12] Peter Crisp, Raymond W. Gibbs, Alice Deignan, Low,Graham, Gerard Steen, Cameron, Lynne, Elena Semino,Joe Grady, Alan Cienki, and Zoltan K¨ovecses. MIP: Amethod for identifying metaphorically used words in dis-course. Metaphor and Symbol, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 1–39,2007.
[13] OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report, 2024.
[14] Gerard J. Steen, Aletta G. Dorst, J. Berenike Herrmann,Anna Kaal, Tina Krennmayr, and Trijntje Pasma. AMethod for Linguistic Metaphor Identiﬁcation: From MIPto MIPVU. John Benjamins, 2010.